# Chholiya Dance
This dance form is a cultural heritage of Kumaun originally a depiction of celebration by warriors of their victory as a dance it now remains a mere fragment of what it used to be. But surely, it is still performed on various celeberatory occassions across Kumaun such as weddings, cultural exhibitions etc.
The saviours of the art are those who put their heart into learning and performing it but they are mostly underpaid workers and they end up struggling financially which may have caused several such bands to shut their operations also this being in demand seasonally they do not make anywhere near sufficient so it has become more of a side business for people to which they turn to only when occasion calls for it. There's nothing wrong with people using it as a means to earn some extra income but what bugs me is that this way it will be hardly a conserved entity. 
The conservation efforts need to deal with it's root causes of becoming obscure within the society, that is it being no longer relevant. The government and people on their level may try hard to promote it through cultural exhibitions to masses which do not even have any sense of belonging to this form of art. It will not yield good results. We need to make efforts towards carrying this art to the future by giving it our future that is by teaching children about it and by including it in more celebratory occasions then mere weddings. Schools can impart it to the students so that everyone (or at least a major part of the society) in the next generation will have learned how to perform it and will just throw themselves up in a celbration of their gallant as that of the Chholiya dance unlike the current circumstances where there are only a few performers and even lesser reasons to perform.
Now, people may state in opposition that it would be a waste of capital and students time as they could learn something which is relevant to the current world. But putting forth such excuses won't save you your culture and that said people can always make time for what they want to learn and would always make excuses for what they don't want to and many won't learn it just cause the schools ask them to participate in learning but that shouldn't stop any society from introducing their precious culture to their kids.

Note: I might have deviated a bit in what I was trying to write and therefore my arguments might not be good ones and a bit confusing even I can feel it that this gives such vibes. Therefore, I request anyone reading this to raise an issue if they have any fixes on arguments or any better arguments/counters.Thanks;

